docs: release notes for Metals 1.5.0 (#7124)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2025-01-16-palladium.md

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">64</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">45</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">11</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center">0</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details: [https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/75?closed=1](https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/75?closed=1)

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs, Zed,
Helix and Sublime Text. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from contributors from the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- [Support for 2.13.16](#support-for-2.13.16)
- [Fix for Metals stopped compiling bug](#fix-for-Metals-stopped-compiling-bug)
- [Error reports improvements](error-reports-improvements)
- [Inlay hints for worksheets](inlay-hints-for-worksheets)

## Support for 2.13.16

> With the new release comes support for Scala 2.13.16. You can read release highlighs in [the Scala 2.13.16 release notes](https://github.com/scala/scala/releases/tag/v2.13.16).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new release comes with support for Scala 2.13.16. You can read release highlighs in [the Scala 2.13.16 release notes](https://github.com/scala/scala/releases/tag/v2.13.16).
```

Reviewer: I feel like this change is more readable, since `comes` is close to `with` so it the complete phrase instead of mentalling having to connect them from afar

## Fix for Metals stopped compiling bug

> A bug where Metals would stop compiling the code and failed to report any errors. This bug was related to a feature, where Metals would pause compilation in certain scenarions like focusing out of editor Window. The feature was removed completely, since there was little benefit from it and it was tricky to make it work. If you expirenced this bug or a similar one, let us know if this release fixes in for you. Thanks go to [tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) for debugging this issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous versions of Metals could sometimes stop compiling the code and fail to report any new errors. This bug was related to a feature, where Metals would pause compilation when focusing out of editor Window. The feature was removed completely, since there was little benefit from it and it was tricky to make it work. If you experienced this bug or a similar one, let us know if this release fixes in for you. Thanks go to [tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) for debugging this issue.
```

## Error reports improvements

> We made small improvements to our error reporting. The reports will be now better deduplicated, also the information about created reports will be now logged to improve their visibility. As previously, full list of generated reports is visible in the Metals doctor, and you can find all the reports under `.metals/.reports` directory in your workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In one of the previous versions of Metals we added mechanisms to save error reports and save them under `.metals/.reports`. In case an error was more prominent it could create a large number of duplicate reports.

Now, the reports will be deduplicated properly and the information about created ones will be logged to improve their visibility. As previously, full list of generated reports is visible in the Metals doctor and the `.metals/.reports` directory.
```

## Inlay hints for worksheets

> Starting from this release, inlay hints will be used to display worksheet decorations. Since a custom Metals extension to LSP was used before, this will make worksheet support available for editors that don't implement this extension (e.g. Zed). Thanks [tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) for implementing this transition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from this release, worksheet decorations will be displayed using inlay hints instead of the previous custom solution. This will make worksheet support available for editors that don't implement this extension (e.g. Zed). Thanks [tgodzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) for implementing this transition.
```
